Desktop e-book: Chapter 2 (#17300)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/modernize-desktop/whats-new-dotnet-core.md

---
title:  What's new with .NET Core 3 for Desktop?
description: Learn about .NET Core, differences between .NET COre and .NET Framework and the new features tht were added in the latest version of the .NET Core - version 3.
ms.date: 09/16/2019
---

# What's new with .NET Core 3 for Desktop?

> From the version 3.0, .NET Core supports Windows Forms and WPF, so now you have a choice between .NET Framework and .NET Core for your desktop applications. This chapter will describe what is .NET Core and what are it's benefits for desktop applications.

Reviewer: This is how we typically introduce versions:

```suggestion
Starting with .NET Core 3.0, .NET Core supports Windows Forms and WPF. So, now you have a choice between .NET Framework and .NET Core for your desktop applications. This chapter will describe what is .NET Core and what are its benefits for desktop applications.
```

Since its launch in 2002, .NET Framework has evolved through the years to support many technologies like Windows Forms, ASP.NET, Entity Framework, Windows Store, and many others. All of them are different in nature. Therefore, Microsoft was approaching this evolution by taking parts of the .NET Framework and creating a different application stack for each technology. That way, development capabilities could be customized for the needs of the specific stack, which maximized the potential of every platform. That lead to fragmentation on the versions of the .NET Framework maintained by different independent teams. All these stacks have a common structure, containing an App Model, a Framework, and a Runtime, but they differ in the implementation of each of these parts.

If you're targeting only one of these platforms, you can use this model. However, in many cases you might need more than one target platform in the same solution. For example, your application may have a desktop admin part, a customer-facing web site that shares the back-end logic running on a server, and even a mobile client. In this case, you need a unified coding experience that can span all this .NET verticals.

> By the time Windows 8 was released, the concept of the Portable Class Libraries (PCL) was born. Originally, the .NET Framework was designed around the assumption that it would always be deployed as a single unit, so [factoring](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decomposition_(computer_science)) wasn't a concern. To face the problem of code sharing between verticals, the driving force was on how to refactor the framework. The idea of contracts is to provide a well-factored API surface area. Contracts are simply assemblies that you compile against and are designed with proper factoring in mind taking care of the dependencies between them.

Reviewer: You could say Portable Class Library (PCL) here, in the singular form...

```suggestion
By the time Windows 8 was released, the concept of Portable Class Libraries (PCLs) was born. Originally, the .NET Framework was designed around the assumption that it would always be deployed as a single unit, so [factoring](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decomposition_(computer_science)) wasn't a concern. To face the problem of code sharing between verticals, the driving force was on how to refactor the framework. The idea of contracts is to provide a well-factored API surface area. Contracts are simply assemblies that you compile against and are designed with proper factoring in mind taking care of the dependencies between them.
```

This leads to reasoning about the API differences between verticals at the assembly level, as opposed to the individual API level that we had before. This aspect enabled a class library experience that can target multiple verticals, also known as portable class libraries.

> ![Release history of .NET Framework](./media/whats-new-dotnet-core/release-history.png)

Reviewer: Pretty hard to read this image plus wrong branding

> ![Release history of .NET Framework](./media/whats-new-dotnet-core-desktop/release-history.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Release history of .NET Framework](./media/whats-new-dotnet-core/release-history.png)
```

This framework gives applications many benefits in terms of efficiency and performance, simplifying the packaging and deployment in the different supported platforms.

The benefits of .NET Core come from these three characteristics:

- **Cross-platform:** It allows application execution on different platforms (Windows, macOS, and Linux).
- **Open source:** .NET Core platform is open source and available through GitHub, fostering transparency and community contributions.
- **Supported:** Microsoft officially supports .NET Core.

In .NET Core 3.0, besides the existing support for web and cloud, there's also support for desktop, IoT, and AI domains. The goal for this framework is impressive: to target every type of .NET development present and future. Microsoft plans to complete this vision with .NET 5 at the end of 2020. The "Core" name was removed to reinforce its uniqueness in the .NET world.

> ![All domains of .NET 5](./media/whats-new-dotnet-core-desktop/all-domains-of-dotnet5.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![All domains of .NET 5](./media/whats-new-dotnet-core/all-domains-of-dotnet5.png)
```

In 2019 the last version of the **.NET Framework - 4.8** was released. It included three major improvements for desktop applications:

- **Modern browser and media controls**: Today, .NET desktop applications use Internet Explorer and Windows Media Player for showing HTML and playing media files. Since these legacy controls don't show the latest HTML or play the latest media files, new controls were added that take advantage of Microsoft Edge and newer media players that support the latest standards.
- **Access to UWP controls**: UWP contains new controls that take advantage of the latest Windows features and touch displays. You don't have to rewrite your applications to use these new features and controls, so you can use these new features in your existing WPF or Windows Forms code.
- **High-DPI improvements**: The resolution of displays is increasing to 4K and 8K resolutions. So, .NET Framework 4.8 adds new HDPI improvements to make sure your existing Windows Forms and WPF applications can look great on these new displays.

Since .NET Framework is installed on millions of machines, Microsoft will continue to support it but won't add new features.

> .NET Core is the open-source, cross-platform, and fast-moving version of .NET. Because of its side-by-side nature, it can take changes without the fear of breaking any application. This means that .NET Core will get new APIs and language features over time that .NET Framework won't. Also, **.NET Core** already has features, that were impossible for .NET Framework, such as:

Reviewer: removed extra comma

```suggestion
.NET Core is the open-source, cross-platform, and fast-moving version of .NET. Because of its side-by-side nature, it can take changes without the fear of breaking any application. This means that .NET Core will get new APIs and language features over time that .NET Framework won't. Also, **.NET Core** already has features that were impossible for .NET Framework, such as:
```

- **Embed .NET directly into an application**: You can deploy .NET Core as part of your application package. This enables you to take advantage of the latest version, features, and APIs without having to wait for a specific version to be installed on the machine.
- **Take advantage of .NET Core features**: .NET Core is the fast-moving, open-source version of .NET. Its side-by-side nature enables fast introduction of new innovative APIs and Base Class Libraries (BCL) improvements without the risk of breaking compatibility. Now Windows Forms and WPF applications can take advantage of the latest .NET Core features, which also includes more fundamental fixes for runtime performance, high-DPI support, and so on.

An essential part of the roadmap for Microsoft was to ease developers to move applications to .NET Core and in future to .NET 5. But if you have existing .NET Framework applications, you shouldn't feel pressured to move to .NET Core. .NET Framework will be fully supported and will always be a part of Windows. However, if you want to use the newest language features and APIs in the future, you'll need to move your applications to .NET Core.

> For your brand new desktop applications, we recommend starting directly on .NET Core. It's lightweight and cross platform, runs side by side, has high performance, and fits perfectly on containers and microservices architectures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For your brand-new desktop applications, we recommend starting directly on .NET Core. It's lightweight and cross platform, runs side by side, has high performance, and fits perfectly on containers and microservices architectures.
```

> ![You can update your .NET Framework applications using the latest .NET Framework version or port your applications to .NET Core](./media/whats-new-dotnet-core-desktop/framework-vs-core.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![You can update your .NET Framework applications using the latest .NET Framework version or port your applications to .NET Core](./media/whats-new-dotnet-core/framework-vs-core.png)
```

> 

Reviewer: The alt text in the previous image doesn't really describe the contents of the image. Also the image has the wrong branding. It should be 3.0

## .NET Standard vs. PCL

The [.NET Standard](../../standard/net-standard.md) is a formal specification of .NET APIs that are intended to be available on all .NET implementations. The motivation behind the .NET Standard is establishing greater uniformity in the .NET ecosystem. .NET Standard is a specification of .NET APIs that make up a uniform set of contracts to compile your code against. These contracts are implemented in each .NET flavor, thus enabling portability across different .NET implementations.

The .NET Standard enables the following key scenarios:

- Defines uniform set of base class libraries APIs for all .NET implementations to implement, independent of the workload.
- Enables developers to produce portable libraries that are usable across .NET implementations, using this same set of APIs.

> .NET Standard is the evolution of PCLs and here are the fundamental differences between .NET Standard and PCLs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET Standard is the evolution of PCLs and the following list shows the fundamental differences between .NET Standard and PCLs:
```

- .NET Standard is a set of curated APIs, picked by Microsoft. PCLs aren't.

> - The APIs that a PCL contains are dependent on the platforms that you choose to target when you create a PCL. This makes a PCL only sharable for the specific targets that you choose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The APIs that a PCL contains are dependent on the platforms that you choose to target when you create it. This makes a PCL only sharable for the specific targets that you choose.
```

- .NET Standard is platform-agnostic, it can run anywhere, on Windows, macOS, Linux, and so on.
- PCLs can also run cross-platform, but they have a more limited reach. PCLs can only target a limited set of platforms.

> ## .NET Core 3 new Desktop features

Reviewer: Would this read better?

```suggestion
## New Desktop features in .NET Core 3.0
```

### Support for Windows Forms and WPF

> Windows Forms and WPF are part of .NET Core 3.0. Both presentation frameworks are for Windows only, so they aren't cross platform. You can think of WPF as a rich layer over DirectX and Windows Forms as a thinner layer over GDI+. WPF and Windows Forms do a great job of exposing and exercising much of the desktop application functionality in Windows. With .NET Core 3.0. Windows Forms and WPF are available for .NET Core and .NET Framework. Now you can start your new desktop applications targeting .NET Core and migrate your existing ones from .NET Framework to .NET Core.

Reviewer: replaced period with a comma

```suggestion
Windows Forms and WPF are part of .NET Core 3.0. Both presentation frameworks are for Windows only, so they aren't cross platform. You can think of WPF as a rich layer over DirectX and Windows Forms as a thinner layer over GDI+. WPF and Windows Forms do a great job of exposing and exercising much of the desktop application functionality in Windows. With .NET Core 3.0, Windows Forms and WPF are available for .NET Core and .NET Framework. Now you can start your new desktop applications targeting .NET Core and migrate your existing ones from .NET Framework to .NET Core.
```

Since its start, targeting the web and cloud workloads, .NET Core has had performance plugged into its DNA. Server-side code must be performant enough to fulfill high-concurrency scenarios and .NET Core scores today as the best performance web platform in the market.

You can take advantage of these performance improvements when you use .NET Core to build your next generation of desktop applications.

## Benefits of open source

Just a few words about .NET Core being open source. Building a cross-platform stack is something complex that needs the interaction of specialized teams on each of the targeted platforms. This effort needs much collaboration from inside and outside of Microsoft. By making it open source and thus open to public collaboration, you get the ultimate agile development style in place, raising the quality bar since issues are detected by a huge and active community of developers.

This is a key success factor of .NET Core that will continue to speed up the roadmap previously mentioned: To be the single .NET platform that any developer will ever need to build any application.

>[!div class="step-by-step"]
>[Previous](why-modern-desktop-applications.md)

> >[Next](migrating-modern-desktop-applications.md)

Reviewer: I'd suggest this file name for the next file. No ing, no repeated words in the path. You could even make it shorter and call that just migrate-applications.

```suggestion
>[Next](migrate-modern-applications.md)
```
